(lecture_35)=
# Tracers in the sea: introduction to ocean movement and biogeochemistry.

In the last block of lectures you learned about the physical structure of the ocean, and how variations in salinity and temperature drive the circulation of water.
In the next five lectures, we'll learn how chemical and biological processes interact with the 


## Plan

- Ocean contains ~40x carbon in atmosphere.
- Ocean-atmosphere exchange is rapid (~110 Gt/yr), or ~15x anthropogenic release.
- Small changes in these fluxes can have BIG implications for atmospheric CO2

- Ocean takes up ~1/3 carbon (pCO2 vs. O2/N2 plot) we release
- Uptake is not uniform - some areas release CO2, others take up CO2 - NET must be uptake
- Patterns are combination of physical, chemical and biological processes.

- Physical processes:
  - circulation
  - deep storage and 'ventilation' - need for surface/deep split

- Chemical processes:
  - dissolution of CO2, reaction with water
  - speciation depends on temp (thermodynamics) & sal (non-ideal solution)
  - temp varies along circulation path - need for hilat/lolat split

- Biological processes:
  - uptake of C by life, which sinks to depth
  - limited by light, nutrients
  - calcification _releases_ CO2, but can have complex interactions with biology.

- Next three lectures will go through chemical, biological, calcification in some detail, showing how they are parameterised in the ocean carbon model you will make in the practicals.
- Final lecture will examine some patterns in this model and think about the role of oceans in future.
