(lecture_49)=
# Wind Power

In this lecture we will outline some of the key environmental factors related to wind power generation and develop some simplified models to help inform how these effects influence the development of wind farms.

There are four aspects we will focus on. First the location of the wind farm and the relation of this to the wind field. Second, the intermittency of the wind, in terms of turbulent fluctuations on a short time scale, diurnal fluctuations and seasonal fluctuations. Third the detail of how the turbine extracts energy from the wind and fourth, the design of an array of turbines which typically interact. Pulling this all together enables us to assess the potential power generation from a wind farm, and the temporal variability of this power. This is key to understand if we wish to provide a constant supply of electricity from a wind powered grid.

## Location

First, the location of the wind farm and its relation to topography and other obstacles such a trees or buildings can have a major impact on the local wind field experienced by the turbines. These issues primarily impact onshore wind arrays. To assess these effects, recall that the large scale wind is produced in the atmosphere by larger scale 100’s km forcing.

```{figure} figures/image1.png
---
name: fig:wind:1
figclass: margin-caption
width: 90%
---
The time and length scales of winds. From Porte-Agel et al. (2020).
```

As these winds flow over the land, the surface provides a frictional drag on the wind, leading to a reduction in the wind speed, and a region called a boundary layer develops above the ground, where the wind adjusts from the high values at altitude to much lower speeds at the surface. The structure of the boundary layer over flat land still depends on whether the surface is covered in trees or buildings, or is primarily open fields, and it may extend a few hundred metres above the surface as seen in the typical data below.

```{figure} figures/image3.png
---
name: fig:wind:3
figclass: margin-caption
width: 50%
---
Wind shear as a function of wind speed. From the Danish Wind Industry Association.
```

If there is an urban canopy or intermittent tree canopy, this adds more disturbance to the boundary layer, changing the velocity profile downwind. Also, there may be a shadow zone downwind where wind speeds are smaller.

Surface topography also has a major impact on the structure of the boundary layer, wind speeds on the windward side are typically higher, and at the top of the hill, the speed may exceed that elsewhere. However on the leeward side, there may be some separation of the wind, and recirculation, leading to reduced wind speeds. These effects can extend considerable distances downwind of the topography.

There can be strong thermal effects related to mountain-valley topography, with katabatic winds composed of cold dense air being channelled downslopes in the evening as the mountain cools and cold air then sinks down into the valley. In contrast, as the mountain warms up in the day, the air rises, and draws air up from the valley. These winds have a strong diurnal component and although local may have a major impact on the wind field, and hence the power generated by a wind turbine.

Finally, near the land-sea interface, there are typically sea-breezes driven by cold air displacing warmer air, with these being onshore in the morning as the land warms up more rapidly, and offshore in the evening as the land cools down more rapidly. Some wind farms are located near shore to benefit from both the onshore and offshore breezes which develop, rather than working from the prevailing winds.

## Intermittency

The second key factor related to calculating wind turbine performance relates to the intermittency of the wind. Typically, the wind field has high frequency turbulent fluctuations with periods of order 1-10 seconds, such as you may experience with gusts of wind. However, the wind field also has fluctuations from diurnal variations in the wind, especially with katabatic wind effects and onshore/offshore wind fields. Third, the background regional wind intensity tends to be very seasonal, with higher winds in the winter in general, but there are fluctuations in the wind intensity on periods of a week to a few weeks, related to the passage of weather patterns of high and low pressure, which have a continental scale.

```{figure} figures/image5.png
---
name: fig:wind:5
figclass: margin-caption
width: 80%
---
The variability of wind speed at different time scales. From the Danish Wind Industry Association.
```

For example, data from the UK wind power production in February 2023 shows periods of weeks when there is significant wind power generation and then weeks when there is less wind power generation.

```{figure} figures/image8.png
---
name: fig:wind:8
figclass: margin-caption
width: 90%
---
Wind shear as a function of wind speed. From the Danish Wind Industry Association.
```

In addition to the fluctuations in the wind owing to the passage of weather systems and owing to seasonal variations, there is also a more general variation in the wind speed from day to day and hour to hour associated with the variations in the strength of the wind.

```{figure} figures/image11.png
---
name: fig:wind:11
figclass: margin-caption
width: 90%
---
day to day and hour to hour associated with the variations in the strength of the wind
```

If a log of wind speeds is collected then, with sufficient samples, the wind speed typically follows a so-called Weibull probability distribution, which can be written in the form of three parameters as:

```{math}
f(T) = \frac{\beta}{\eta} \left( \frac{T - \gamma}{\eta} \right)^{\beta - 1} e^{-\left( \frac{T - \gamma}{\eta} \right)^{\beta}}
```

where the parameters are $\beta$, $\eta$ and $\gamma$. This distribution has a long tail of high wind speeds of the form shown below.

```{figure} figures/image14.png
---
name: fig:wind:14
figclass: margin-caption
width: 90%
---
An example Weibull distribution (left) and wind speed data (right).
```

In assessing the power from a wind turbine which can be attained from the wind over time, we need to establish the distribution of the wind, and then combine this with the power produced by the turbine for each wind speed, to derive the average power produced. The average power therefore depends on the wind speed distribution, so that a turbine of a given maximum power will only produce a fraction of that power, given there will be days of lower wind speed than needed to generate that power.

A second take home from this data on wind is that there is considerable intermittency on a range of different time scales. This means that in order for a purely renewable energy generation system using wind turbines to produce a continuous supply of power, some storage of energy is needed. Furthermore, this storage should be comparable to the total power used over a period of several weeks. Later we will look at storage solutions. 

## Power generated by a turbine

The next problem to address is the power produced by a turbine as a function of wind speed, now we have a description of the wind. In practice this is a complex problem to solve, as it depends on the turbulent flow or air through the turbine, including the turbulent  fluctuations in the wind as well as the mean wind. Many modern wind turbines are so large that the span of the blades is of order 100 m and so they extend well into the atmospheric boundary layer. This means that the top of the turbine experiences a different wind speed than the lower parts of the blade, and hence the forcing on the blades is not independent of the position of the blades.

Nonetheless, it is useful to develop an expression for the power generated from a wind turbine in a uniform wind as a reference. However even this problem is rather difficult. However, all is not lost, and we can follow the approach of Betz to calculate a maximum value for the power generated. Having an estimate of the maximum theoretical power is useful as a reference for actual measured values of power generated in a real turbine since it allows us to see if there is any scope for improvement in an actual design.

To develop the estimate, the physical idea we are exploring is that as the wind passes through the turbine it slows down and transfers some of its kinetic energy to rotational energy of the turbine rotors. In turn, these generate electricity through a generator. As a very simple back of the envelope estimate, you might say that if the wind speed is u, and the turbine area AT, then the kinetic energy of the wind passing through the turbine is the product of the mass flux and the kinetic energy per unit mass

```{math}
(r A u) \frac{u^2}{2}
```

However, we can develop a better (but not perfect) estimate for the power production as follows. We assume that the wind has speed u upstream, which corresponds to the prevailing wind speed. As the wind approaches the turbine and drives the blades round, the air speed decreases to value v say at the turbine and on leaving the turbine and moving downstream, the wind slows down to further speed w.

```{figure} figures/image16.png
---
name: fig:wind:16
figclass: margin-caption
width: 90%
---
A schematic of wind speed through a turbine.
```

We can use mass conservation to relate the air flow which passes through the turbine, $Q$, say in terms of (i) the flow upstream of the turbine, which passes through an area Au with (ii) that passing through the turbine, of area $A_T$, and (iii) that downwind, when the flow has adjusted to speed w, AD say, according to the relation ({numref}`fig:wind:16`).

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:1
Q = r A_u u = r A_T v = r A_D w
```

where $r$ is the air density. The force acting on the wind at the turbine, $F$, say, is used to drive the rotor arms. This force equals the change in momentum of the flow from the upstream to the downstream sections in {numref}`fig:wind:16`, giving

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:2
Q u - Q w = F
```

Finally, the work done by the wind in driving the rotor is given by Fv, and this matches the change in the energy of the air flow from upstream to downstream, so that

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:3
Q \frac{u^2}{2} - Q \frac{w^2}{2} = Fv
```

In these equations, we know the value of u, the upstream wind, and the area of the turbine $A_T$. Thus, we want to try to combine the equations to find a relation between the power generated by the turbine, $Fv$, and the values of $u$ and $A_T$. However, we do not have enough relations to do this exactly, but we can combine the expressions to express $Fv$ in terms of $u$, $A_T$ and $w$, the speed downstream, as follows 

Equation (3) can be written

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:4
Q (u - w) (u + w) = 2 Fv
```

Equation (2) can be written

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:5
Q (u - w) = F
```

Replacing the term $Q(u-w)$ in {eq}`eq:wind:4` with $F$ (using {eq}`eq:wind:5`) we find

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:6
u + w = 2 v
```

so the speed through the turbine is the average of the upstream and downstream air speeds.

Now we can use (6) to write the mass flow rate of air through the turbine as

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:7
Q = r A_T \frac{(u + w)}{2}
```

Combining this with {eq}`eq:wind:4` we have the expression for the power generated

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:8
Fv = r a_t U^3 (1 + l)^2 \frac{(1 - l)}{2}
```

where $l = w/u$ is the ratio of the speed downwind to the speed upwind, and we know that $0< l < 1$.

```{figure} figures/sketch1.png
---
name: fig:wind:s1
figclass: margin-caption
width: 60%
---
Plot of $(1 + l)^2 (1-l)$ as a function of $l$
```

Although we do not know the value of w/u, we can find the maximum value of $Fv$ as a function of $l$, and this will provide an upper bound on the power which can be generated.
By differentiating the right hand side of {eq}`eq:wind:8` with respect to $l$ we find that the maximum occurs when $l = 1/3$, which means that the maximum power would be generated if the downwind speed has value $u/3$. In this case, we find that the power has value

```{math}
:label: eq:wind:9
Fv = 16 / 27 [r A_T u^3 / 2]
```

Comparing to the back of the envelope number above, we see that since 16/27 ~0.59, the turbine can extract less than 60% of the kinetic energy of the upstream wind passing through an area equal to that of the turbine rotors. In practice, this downwind speed is determined by the flow and does not equal $u/3$, so the power is less than this maximum value. Typical turbines may have a range of values which could be as large as 30-40% at some wind speeds.

It is interesting to note that the power is proportional to $u^3$, so that if the wind speed halves, the power produced falls to 1/8. This illustrates the crucial role of turbine placement in maximising the performance of a turbine; if the turbine is in shadow of an obstacle, with lower speeds than upstream, then the power drops off. Also, the mean power generated by the turbine over a certain period depends on the number of days there is strong wind compared to weak wind, and even if a turbine is rated to produce a certain power, there may be many calm days when it produces a much more modest output.

To estimate the mean power which can be generated from a turbine, we can combine the probability distribution of the wind speed with a turbine power curve. The turbine power curve typically has an S shape (see {numref}`fig:wind:17`), with the power increasing with wind speed according to the simple model above.

```{figure} figures/image17.png
---
name: fig:wind:17
figclass: margin-caption
width: 100%
---
Wind speed and power output.
```

Wind turbine power curve. Turbine cuts out at low speed and saturates at high speed. Illustration of the turbine power for given wind speed showing the amplification of changes in wind speed on the power production. 

However, at high winds, the turbine rotors tend to be rotated to prevent damage and the power output will be capped. Suppose (i) at a given location, the probability that the wind speed has value w is P(w), and (ii) the power generated by the turbine at wind speed w is F(w)w, then the average power generated by this turbine at this site will be given by the expression

```{math}
F = \int_0^{w_{max}} P(w) F(w) w dw
```

In general F is about 20-25% of the maximum power rating of a turbine given the distribution of the wind, and so on average a turbine only produces about 1/5-1/4 of the maximum rated power generation. This means that to generate 1 unit of power, 4-5 turbines with 1 unit of power as their maximum power generation capacity need to be installed.

## Wake and array designs

Many wind turbines are installed in arrays, and the relative position of the turbines in such an array is crucial for the effective operation of the downwind turbines so that the air flow is not diminished from an upstream turbine.

```{figure} figures/image20.png
---
name: fig:wind:20
figclass: margin-caption
width: 100%
---
An array of wind turbines.
```

We focussed on the power extraction in the previous section, and found that the air flow downwind has a reduced speed compared to the upwind region. This wake represents a momentum deficit in the air flow, and as the flow continues to move downstream, turbulent mixing between the wake and the surrounding wind flow leads to a gradual recovery of the momentum in the wake.

```{figure} figures/image21.png
---
name: fig:wind:21
figclass: margin-caption
width: 80%
---
A light fog reveals the wake effect behind turbines at Vattenfall's Horns Rev wind farm off Denmark. Photo: Vattenfall.
```

Idealised model for the decay of momentum in the wake (Jensen Model)

Wake grows linearly downstream

```{math}
r(x) = r(0) + l x
```

Speed adjusts to wind according to idealised model

```{math}
U(x) = U_e - (U_e - U(0)) \frac{r(0)^2}{(r(0) + l x)^2}
```

```{figure} figures/sketch2.png
---
name: fig:wind:s2
figclass: margin-caption
width: 80%
---
The impact of wake on turbine power.
```

Placement of turbines downwind is crucial to avoid reducing power generation potential but also to maximise number of turbines on a given site.

Wind direction can also impact the efficiency of turbines as seen in the image below showing data on the reduction in power generation downwind.
