(lecture_22)=
# Lecture 22: Aerosols
```{rubric} Formation, growth, composition, and removal processes
```

```{highlights} 
Key Points:
- The atmosphere contains numerous aerosol particles covering a size range of $1-2 \ \mathrm{nm}$ up to $\gt 100 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$ diameter and containing a variety of chemical constituents. Particle distribution is divided into a nucleation, an Aitken, an accumulation, and a coarse mode. 
- Primary particles are directly emitted into the atmosphere. Secondary particles are formed in the atmosphere from gaseous precursors through nucleation. 
- Primary sources of particles and their gaseous precursors can be natural or anthropogenic. 
- Particles are removed from the atmosphere through dry and wet deposition.  
- Aerosol chemical composition varies widely depending on the sources and location. Main components are nitrate, sulphate, chloride, ammonium, sodium, potassium, calcium, and organic material. 
- Heterogeneous reactions occur on the surface or in the condensed phase of aerosol particles. This leads to the chemical conversion of trace gases and their removal. The rate of this process is usually expressed in terms of the uptake coefficient, $\gamma$, defined in terms of kinetic theory of gases.
 ```


(atmosphere_particles_intro)=
## Introduction to atmospheric particles
The atmosphere also contains a wide variety of microscopic particulate material, known as the atmospheric aerosol or particulate matter (PM).
The aerosol plays an important role in both the physics and chemistry of the atmosphere.

Atmospheric aerosol particles may be liquid, solid or multiphase.
In the stratosphere the aerosol consists predominantly of sulphuric acid droplets formed by oxidation of sulphur gases ($\mathrm{SO_2}$ and OCS).
In the troposphere the aerosol is much more complex.

Aerosol particles are absorbing and/or scattering shortwave radiation and are therefore directly influencing the radiative balance of the atmosphere.
The intensity of light scattering or absorption is strongly dependent on the size and chemical composition of particles.

Aerosols are also involved in the formation of clouds - the water droplets that comprise clouds always condense on certain pre-existing aerosols called cloud condensation nuclei.
Particle size and chemical composition are key parameters, which determine whether an aerosol particle is an efficient nucleus for cloud droplet formation.
These aerosol particle - cloud interactions lead to a complex feedback system influencing the hydrological cycle.

Both processes, light absorption/scattering and could formation, are not very well understood on a global level and are one on the main uncertainties associated with studies predicting the future climate.
The uncertainty is mainly due to the large variability in the physical and chemical properties of aerosol particles, as well as their temporal and spatial distributions.

Aerosols also provide a sink for traces gases.
The reactions of gaseous compounds at the surface or within the condensed phase of aerosol particles are called heterogeneous reactions.

Particles are involved in health impacts caused by air pollution.
Aerosol particles $\lt 10 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$, which penetrate into the lung (larger particles are deposited in the nose and mouth), have been shown to correlate with increasing rates of respiratory and cardio-vascular diseases in epidemiological studies.
The particle properties causing these health effects are not well understood, but particle size and the chemical composition (e.g., transition metals, oxidizing organic components) are likely responsible for the observed particle toxicity.

(section-label)=
## Size distribution of atmospheric aerosols
The size of atmospheric particles ranges from $\lt 1-2 \ \mathrm{nm}$ to $\gt 100 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$ diameter. 
A typical distribution as a function of size is shown in [Figure 1](figure1).
The distribution is usually divided into the nucleation mode ($\lt 10 \ \mathrm{nm}$), the Aitken mode ($\gt 100 \ \mathrm{nm}$), the accumulation mode (from $100 \ \mathrm{nm}$ to $1-2 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$, and the coarse mode ($\gt 1-2 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$).

The maximum in the particle concentration generally lies in the nucleation mode size range when particles are measured in number per unit volume of air.
The nucleation mode particles, although numerous, contribute very little to the aerosol mass.

The maximum in surface area, which is the important parameter for light scattering and for many heterogeneous reaction rates, usually lies in the so-called ‘accumulation’ mode.
The maximum in volume/mass of particles per unit volume of air lies in the accumulation/coarse fraction.

The total particle number concentration varies greatly in the troposphere with $\lt 20 \ \mathrm{cm}^{-3}$ for the polar regions and $\gt 10^5 \ \mathrm{cm}^{-3}$ for an urban aerosol.
The total number concentration decreases strongly with altitude and at altitudes of $3-5 \ \mathrm{km}$ typical concentration of about $100 \ \mathrm{particles} \, \mathrm{cm^{-3}}$ are found.

```{figure} ./figures/figure1.jpg
---
name: figure1
figclass: margin-caption
---

Typical size distribution of the tropospheric aerosol.
```

## Formation processes and sources
### Formation processes and processes affecting size distribution

Formation processes of aerosols are highly variable in time and space, which is one of the main reasons why the influence and interactions of particles with other parts of the climate system are so difficult to account for in atmospheric chemistry and climate models.

Particles in the coarse mode are usually produced mechanically by weathering and wind erosion processes or through bubble bursting over the ocean. Direct anthropogenic emissions contribute to coarse mode particles through traffic and industrial processes. 

In the smallest size fraction (nucleation mode), particle formation arises via homogeneous nucleation, which is the formation of new particles through gas-to-particle conversion processes.
Particle nucleation is frequently observed over land mainly in remote areas but also over the ocean.
Chemical compounds forming the initial clusters of atmospheric nucleation particles are not well characterized but water and sulphuric acid, ammonium, amines, and highly oxygenated organic molecules (HOMs) are most likely important in forming the initial nucleation clusters.
Organic compounds are thought to condense onto the initial H2O - H2SO4 clusters, i.e., being responsible for the initial growth of the clusters into stable particles of a few nm in size (see [Figure 2](figure2)).

```{figure} ./figures/figure2.png
---
name: figure2
figclass: margin-caption
---

Typical evolution of particle size distribution after a particle nucleation event (Beijing 2—7 October 2013).
White dashed curve represents the mean diameter.
From Guo et al 2014, Lee et al 2019.
```

The high initial number concentration of particles with d < 10nm are rapidly reduced through coagulation, resulting in aerosol lifetimes of the order of minutes for these smallest particles.
The nucleation mode particles, although numerous, contribute very little to the aerosol surface or mass.

The coagulation rate of particles with size 1 and 2 is given by
```{math}
    \dv{N}{t} = -K_{1,2}N_1N_2
```
```{math}
    K_{1,2} = \pi(d_1 + d_2)(D_1 + D_2)
```
where $K_{1,2}$ is the coagulation coefficient, $D$ is the diffusion constant, and $d$ is the particle diameter.

```{list-table} Coagulation coefficients for particles of different sizes ($K_{1,2} \times 10^{-10} \ \mathrm{cm}^3 \ \mathrm{s}^{-1}$) under standard conditions.
:header-rows: 1
:name: label-to-reference
:stub-columns: 1
:widths: 28 18 18 18 18 

* - $d_1 \ (\mathrm{\mu m})$ \ $d_2 \ (\mathrm{\mu m})$
  - 0.01
  - 0.1
  - 1.0
  - 10.0
* - 0.01
  - 67
  -
  -
  -
* - 0.1
  - 180
  - 8.6
  -
  -
* - 1.0
  - 1700
  - 24
  - 3.5
  -
* - 10.0
  - 16000
  - 220
  - 10.3
  - 3.0
```
