(lecture_36)=
# Ocean Carbon Chemistry and the Solubility Pump

<!-- Reaction of CO2 with water.

pH dependence.

Conservative tracer(s) for the carbon system.

## Model Equations

DIC and TA tracers, C speciation calculation, pCO2 equilibration
 -->


The majority of carbon (XX%) in the ocean exists as {term}`Dissolved Inorganic Carbon (DIC)<DIC>`.
In this lecture, we'll look at how carbon moves between the ocean and the atmosphere, and how dissolved $\mathrm{CO_2}$ and {term}`DIC` are related.
We'll then combine this chemical knowledge with what we know about ocean circulation to see whether it explains patterns in ocean-atmosphere $\mathrm{CO_2}$ fluxes.

## How does $\mathrm{CO_2}$ get into water?

- Ideal gasses dissolve into water following Henry's Law ($K_0$)
- Sensitive to temperature
  - Think: what happens as water changes temperature?
  - Refer back to CO2 patterns.
- Calculate DIC concentration from pCO2 with only $K_0$

## $\mathrm{CO_2}$ reacts with water

- Reacts with water to form a weak **diprotic** acid, carbonic acid, which dissociates.
  - $\mathrm{CO_{2(aq)} + H_2O \leftrightarrow H_2CO_3 \leftrightarrow HCO_3^- + H^+ \leftrightarrow HCO_3^{2-} + 2H^+}$
- {term}`DIC` is the sum of the dissolved, C-containing species:
  - $\mathrm{DIC = [CO_{2(aq)}] + [H_2CO_3] + [HCO_3^-] + [CO_3^{2-}]}$
  - Square brackets denote concentration.
  - Units generally $\mathrm{\mu mol~kg^{-1}}$ - 'average' seawater has around $\mathrm{2100 \mu mol~kg^{-1}}$
- The abundance of each species is linked to the pH of seawater ($\mathrm{pH = -\log_{10}[H^+]}$)
  - Equilibrium constants
  - Calculate $HCO_3^-$ as a fn of DIC and pH.
  - Bjerrum Plot.
  - Approximate abundance of species in 'normal' seawater.
- Ks and Temp/Sal
  - drive changes in speciation - $\dv{DIC}{pCO_2}$ as a fn of T/S

## $\mathrm{CO_2}$ and pH

- {term}`Ocean Acidification`

## Chemistry + Circulation

- Describe cycle:
  - Surface cooling & equilibration
  - downwelling & transport
  - upwelling & equilibration
  - {term}`Solubility Pump`
- How to calculate equilibration?
  - Need to know DIC and one other parameter...
  - above given pH - measure of the free positive ions that are the net results of multiple acid-base equilibria in the ocean.
    - Highly sensitive to T/S - i.e. not ideal because it is not _conservative_.

## Conservative Tracer for Speciation

{term}`Total Alkalinity`
- Describes the charge balance of seawater.
- Conservative, as includes positive and negative species.
- Useful second parameter for tracking C speciation.
- No analytical solution, but...
  - Show carbonate alkalinity approximations.
  - Mention carbon calculators that do it for you.

## A 3-box representation of solubility pump.
- Go through model equations for a conservative tracer
