(lecture_1)=
# Course Overview

The course will begin with an overview of how the surface of the planet functions, with introductory lectures on the global carbon cycle, and the source of energy on the planet.
Then the course will comprise modules on groundwater pollution, ice melting, rivers and flooding, air pollution, and the physics and chemistry of the oceans and land and specifically the movement of carbon through Earth’s surface environment.

In each module, students will learn about environmental challenges particular to that fluid and that environment, for example groundwater contamination, air pollution, floods and droughts.
Within each model, students will learn how to apply fundamental mathematics, which will be taught incidentally within each topic, towards the various environmental systems, in order to understand the changing planet and the future challenges we face under population growth and anthropogenic climate change.
Each module will contain case studies related to environmental challenges and solutions.
In the Easter term, the impact of the Energy Transition on the Environment will be explored, including how energy can be used efficiently and effectively (wind, solar, engineered buildings) and some of the environmental challenges associated with the energy transition (capture of carbon, storage of carbon underground, geoengineering).
The course will consist of 57 lectures, three lectures per week.
There will be problem/example sheets provided for support during weekly supervisions (20 weeks of supervision).

## How to use this Website

This website contains summary notes to accompany each lecture of the course.
These are divided into thematic blocks, corresponding to the eight lecture blocks of the course.

These notes are intended to complement the lectures; they will not contain all the material you are given in lectures and are not intended as a replacement for the lectures.
It is essential to attend the course lectures and complete the practical components of the course if you want to do well.

## Course Assessment

The course has eight examinable modules, which are:

- Groundwater Hydrology
- Cryosphere
- Flooding
- Air Pollution
- Physics of the Atmosphere and Oceans (also termed 'global environment')
- Ocean Carbon Cycle
- Terrestrial Carbon Cycle and Polar Case Studies
- Energy Transition and the Environment

There is one, in person, exam in the normal exam period (late May, early June), where these modules will be examined.

In addition to the exam (worth 30% of the total mark), there is a computational exam (at home, open book - 20%), a policy paper (25%) and a lab report (25%).

### Exam (30%)

The exam in May/June will have eight questions, one from each module.
Four of the questions will be 15 minute questions, four will be 30 minute questions.
They will be a mixture of mathematics and short answers.
All questions must be attempted.

This exam is worth 30% of the total mark for the course.

### Computational Exam (20%)

The computational exam will be a 2 hour, at home exam to be scheduled for some point in early May.
Our expectation is that for everyone who has been doing the practicals, the computational exam will be easy.
It will involve doing a series of basic tasks in python (or another coding language of your choice if you have chosen to do the practicals in another coding language) including, but not limited to:

- Incorporating a Dataset
- Generating specific plots
- Doing simple statistical analysis of this data
- Writing simple code to analyse the dataset

The computational exam was added at the request of the management committee to the course as a way to check that students have been doing the practicals.
Therefore, we hope that everyone will be able to get 100% on the computational exam.

### Policy Paper (25%)

The policy paper is designed to allow students to explore an environmental dataset and produce both a post note style fact sheet about this dataset, as well as a post note + recommendation policy paper.
The policy paper follows from the practicals that will be done in Michaelmas term.
Each week in Michaelmas term, the practicals will focus on how to incorporate datasets of varying complexity into python, and how to generate different types of plots with these data.
These plots will include statistical and timeseries analysis as well as spatial plots.
The objective is to understand how to best approach the visual display of quantitative information for maximum clarity and impact.

Students will be given a choice of three environmental datasets and related policy-style questions at the end of Michaelmas term.
They can choose which dataset and policy question interests them most.
Over the winter vacation, students can start to work with their dataset, as well as do background reading about the science behind the policy question they have chosen.
At the start of Lent term, the first two practicals and first supervision will be dedicated to going through the plotting of the environmental data, and demonstrators will be available to help students with their data analysis.
For the first supervision of Lent term, a 2-3 page, fact-based, postnote style policy piece will be due to the supervisors, who will discuss its contents and related figures and data analysis in the first supervision.

### Lab Report (25%)

The lab report will consist of 6 sections, each linked to one of the practical sessions to be held during lent term.
The students can (and should!) write the lab report as they work throughout the term.

During the first five practicals, students will build a simple climate model.
The first five sections of the lab report will involve answering short questions posed at the end of each practical (max 250 words + 1 figure).
Each of these will contribute 10% of the lab report mark, totalling 50%.
In these sections, students will be assessed on their ability to produce a graph illustrating some specified behaviour of the model, and briefly explain the processes driving that behaviour.

In the sixth practical, students will use the climate model that they have built in the previous sessions to investigate an aspect of the climate system from a list of possible topics that they will be given.
The write-up for this section of the lab report will be longer (max 1500 words + 4 figures) and contribute the remaining 50% of the assessment.
This section of the report should include a statement of the problem the student is investigating, a discussion for how they configured the model to investigate this, some results, and brief conclusions.
In this section, students will be assessed on their ability to apply the model they have made to creatively investigate some aspect of the climate system.
Students will be marked on evidence that they understand the model they have created enough to manipulate and modify it, and assessing their ability to interrogate the processes that are driving complex behaviour in the system.
An example answer for this part of the assessment will be provided at the start of Lent term.

Students should include a copy of their Google Colab notebooks for all their practicals alongside their lab report.
These will not be formally assessed, but will be screened to assess that the students are writing their own code for the assessed components.

After each session, we will release source code for a working model based on that week’s project.
In this way, students will still be able to complete subsequent sessions even if they were unable to participate in the session for a given week.
Note, however, that for full credit, we do expect students to write their own model code and turn this in with the lab report.
