(lecture_23)=
# Lecture 23: Air pollution and climate – direct effects

```{rubric} Health, visibility, direct effects on climate
```

```{highlights}
Aims:

1. To describe the main impacts of aerosols on human health and the relevant aerosol characteristics (composition and size).
2. To describe the main methods used to assess human health impacts (epidemiology vs. toxicology).
3. To describe how aerosols impacts visibility.
4. To describe the direct effect of aerosols on climate (absorption vs. scattering of radiation).

Key Points:

- Aerosols or particulate matter are a main contributor to air pollution.
- The main impacts on health are pulmonary and cardiovascular diseases.
- Aerosol composition as well as size are important for health impacts.
- Health impacts are determined through a combination of epidemiology and toxicology studies.
- Aerosols impact visibility.
- A positive radiative forcing (incoming radiation > outgoing radiation)warms the atmosphere, whilst a negative forcing cools the atmosphere.
- Aerosols can scatter and absorb radiation directly. Most aerosol species scatter solar radiation (net negative forcing).
```

## Health

Air pollution is a major cause of premature death and disease and is the single largest environmental health risk in Europe.
Besides their effects on climate, aerosol particles are one of the main components of polluted air.
The main focus at the beginning of the scientific investigation of air pollution (in the 2nd half of the last century) was on gaseous components such as ozone and nitrogen oxides.
However, it is increasingly becoming clear that aerosol particles are the main health-relevant component in polluted air, contributing to many diseases.

Epidemiological studies have shown since decades that increased aerosol concentrations lead to increases in a wide range of respiratory and cardio-vascular diseases and mortality ({numref}`Figure {number}<particle_mortality>`).

```{figure} figures/figure1.jpg
---
name: particle_mortality
---
Correlation of increased particles mass and relative increase in mortality in six US cities (Dockery et al., 1993).
```

Health effects of aerosol particles are highly size dependant as not all particle sizes are penetrating equally deep into the lung.
The smallest particles, below ca. $100 \ \mathrm{nm}$ are mainly deposited in the lung due to diffusional processes and are thus deposited in the lowest lung region which has the largest surface area.
Particles larger than about $10 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$ are retained in the upper airways.

Epidemiological studies usually refer to PM mass concentrations, but some health effects may relate to specific constituents such as bioaerosols, polycyclic aromatic compounds, and transition metals.

Both short- and long-term exposure to air pollution can lead to a wide range of diseases, including stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, trachea, bronchus and lung cancers, aggravated asthma, and lower respiratory infections.
The World Health Organization (WHO) provides evidence of links between exposure to air pollution and type 2 diabetes, obesity, systemic inflammation, Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified air pollution, in particular PM2.5, as a leading cause of cancer.
A recent [global review](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6904854/) found that  **chronic exposure can affect every organ in the body** , complicating and exacerbating existing health conditions


```{figure} figures/figure2.png
---
name: pollution_impacts
---
Particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 µm or less (PM2.5), particulate matter with a diameter of 10 µm or less (PM10), ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) and sulphur dioxide (SO2)
**Source:**  EEA, "[Healthy environment, healthy lives](https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/healthy-environment-healthy-lives) ," 2019.
```

The EEA estimates that, in 2019, approximately 307,000 premature deaths were attributable to PM2.5 in the 27 EU Member States.
Nitrogen dioxide ($\mathrm{NO_2}$) was linked to 40,400 premature deaths, and ground-level ozone was linked to 16,800 premature deaths.

## Health methodologies

Understanding the mechanisms by which hazardous substances can cause harm to human health is a key aspect of environmental and health research.
Two key complementary areas of study are epidemiology and toxicology.

### Epidemiology

Epidemiology is the study and analysis of the distribution (who, when, and where), patterns and determinants of health and disease conditions in defined population.

#### Case-control studies

Case-control studies select subjects based on their disease status.
It is a retrospective study. A group of individuals that are disease positive (the "case" group) is compared with a group of disease negative individuals (the "control" group)
The control group should ideally come from the same population that gave rise to the cases.
The case-control study looks back through time at potential exposures that both groups (cases and controls) may have encountered.

Case-control studies are usually faster and more cost-effective than cohort studies but are sensitive to bias (such as recall bias and selection bias)
The main challenge is to identify the appropriate control group; the distribution of exposure among the control group should be representative of the distribution in the population that gave rise to the cases
This can be achieved by drawing a random sample from the original population at risk
This has as a consequence that the control group can contain people with the disease under study when the disease has a high attack rate in a population.

#### Cohort studies

Cohort studies select subjects based on their exposure status.
The study subjects should be at risk of the outcome under investigation at the beginning of the cohort study; this usually means that they should be disease free when the cohort study starts
The cohort is followed through time to assess their later outcome status.
An example of a cohort study would be the investigation of a cohort of smokers and non-smokers over time to estimate the incidence of lung cancer.

Prospective studies have many benefits over case control studies.
Temporality can be established in a prospective study, and confounders are more easily controlled for.
However, they are more costly, and there is a greater chance of losing subjects to follow-up based on the long time period over which the cohort is followed.

**"Correlation does not imply causation"** is a common theme for much of the epidemiological literature.
For epidemiologists, the key is in the term inference.
Correlation, or at least association between two variables, is a necessary but not sufficient criterion for the inference that one variable causes the other.
Epidemiologists use gathered data and a broad range of biomedical and psychosocial theories in an iterative way to generate or expand theory, to test hypotheses, and to make educated, informed assertions about which relationships are causal, and about exactly how they are causal.

```{attention} A causal link can be established if there is enough mechanistic understanding.
```

### Toxicology

One way to gain mechanistic understanding is through toxicology.

Toxicity experiments may be conducted _in vivo_, _in vitro_, or _in silico_.

An _in vitro_ (latin: "in the glass") test is a study that is performed outside of a living organism (i.e, glass, petri dishes). 
The test usually involves the use of isolated tissues, organs or cells.
In contrast, an _in vivo_ (latin: "in the living") test is a study that is performed in living organisms (i.e, rat, rabbit).
Computer modeling (_in silico_) is an alternative testing method; for example using computer models of chemicals and proteins, structure-activity relationships can be determined, and chemical structures that are likely to bind to, and interfere with, proteins with essential functions, can be identified.

## Visibility

Air pollution can create a white or brown haze that affects how far we can see.
It also affects how well we are able to see the colours, forms, and textures of natural and historic landscapes.

Fog and haze are both weather phenomena that obstruction vision.

**Haze** is caused when sunlight encounters aerosols in the air.
The particles scatter and absorb light.
The more particles in the air, the more scattering and absorption of light to reduce the clarity and colours of what you see.
Some types of particles scatter more light, especially when it is humid.
In high humidity conditions particles can adsorb water and grow in size (hygroscopic growth).
Haze is mostly caused by air pollution from human activity including industry, power generation, transportation, and agriculture.
Natural haze is caused by dust, and wildfires.

**Fog** is mainly composed of water and reduces visibility below $1 \ \mathrm{km}$ by definition.
If the visibility is above 1 km then the phenomenon is called **mist**.
**Haze** is made of both dry and liquid particles suspended in the air and the visibility typically ranges between $2-5 \ \mathrm{km}$.

```{figure} figures/figure3.png
---
name: beijing_haze
---
Beijing on a bad day (on the left) and on a good day (on the right).
```

## Direct effects on climate

**Forcing** is defined as a change in the energy flux of Earth's atmosphere, expressed in units of Watts per square metre ($\mathrm{W \ m^{-2}}$).
Some things that can cause a radiative forcing include volcanoes, emissions of greenhouse gases, and changes in solar activity.
Generally, forcing is calculated as the difference in the net radiative flux at either the tropopause or at the top-of-the-atmosphere (TOA) due to changes in the external perturbation.
A **positive forcing** leads to a warming (with incoming radiation \> outgoing radiation) and a **negative forcing** leads to a cooling (with outgoing radiation \> incoming radiation).

### Aerosol-radiation interactions (scattering vs. absorption)

**Aerosol-radiation interactions** (also known as **aerosol direct effects** ) refers to the scattering of solar radiation and absorption of solar and terrestrial radiation due to the presence of aerosol particles in the atmosphere
 In general, radiative forcing due to aerosol-radiation interactions is proportional to the amount of aerosol particles in the atmosphere and their ability to extinguish radiation, which in turn is a function of particle size and wavelength.

The schematic on the left of {numref}`Figure {number}<radiative_scattering>` shows that the scattering of shortwave radiation reduces the amount of solar energy that reaches the surface, leading to a cooling of the atmosphere and surface, expressed as a **net negative forcing** at the TOA.
The schematic on the right of {numref}`Figure {number}<radiative_scattering>` shows that an absorbing aerosol (e.g., black carbon) leads to a warming of the atmosphere because less solar energy reaches the surface and the TOA, resulting in a **net positive forcing** at the TOA.
Note that the warmed atmosphere re-emits some of the absorbed radiation at longer wavelengths, some of which reaches the surface and partially offsets the decrease in surface temperatures.

```{figure} figures/figure4.png
---
name: radiative_scattering
---
Radiative influence of scattering (left panel) and absorbing aerosol particles (right panel).
```

The scattering and absorption properties of different aerosol types depend on particle size (i.e., larger particles absorb more and scatter less), shape, chemical composition and mixing state.
For most aerosol types, the scattering of solar radiation dominates the absorption of solar radiation, resulting in a net negative solar forcing.
The major exception is **Black Carbon** (soot) which strongly absorbs solar radiation resulting in a positive forcing.
Larger-sized aerosol particles (e.g., mineral dust) tend to strongly absorb terrestrial (longwave) radiation, which can result in a positive forcing.

{numref}`aerosol_forcing` shows the net global mean forcing from aerosol-radiation interactions for different aerosol types and the forcing from all aerosol types combined, which is negative as most aerosol particles present in the atmosphere tend to be efficient scatters.

```{table} Net global mean forcing from aerosol-radiation interactions for different aerosol types and the forcing from all aerosol types combined. Table from Boucher (2012).
:name: aerosol_forcing
| Aerosol type                           | Net radiative forcing ($\mathbf{W \ m^{-2}}$) | Uncertainty range ($\mathbf{W \ m^{-2}}$)       |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Fossil fuel sulphates                  | -0.40                                         | -0.60 to -0.20                                  |
| Fossil fuel + biofuel black carbon     | +0.40                                         | +0.05 to +0.60                                  |
| Fossil fuel + biofuel organic aerosols | -0.12                                         | -0.40 to 0.10                                   |
| Biomass burning                        | +0.00                                         | -0.20 to +0.20                                  |
| Desert dust                            | -0.10                                         | -0.30 to +0.10                                  |
| **All aerosol**                        | **-0.35**                                     | **-0.85 to +0.15**                              |
```

Consider the case of scattering by a spherical particle of radius $r$, for which the scattering, absorption and extinction efficiency can be prescribed on the basis of theory, as a function of a dimensionless **particle size parameter**, $\chi$:

```{math}
:label: p_size_param
\chi = \frac{2\pi r}{\lambda}
```

In general, the scattering of radiation is largest when $\chi \simeq 1$ (i.e. the Mie scattering regime), which in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum is the case for those particles with radii comparable to the wavelength of visible light (ca. $400-750 \ \mathrm{nm}$, {numref}`scattering_regime`).
Note that most anthropogenic aerosol particles are efficient at scattering solar radiation because they are in the so-called "accumulation-mode" size range ($0.1-1 \ \mathrm{\mu m}$ particle diameter).

```{figure} figures/figure5.png
---
name: scattering_regime
---
Type of single scattering regime as a function of radiation wavelength and particle radius, assuming particles are spherical.
Figure from W. Brune.
```

### Aerosol optical depth (AOD)

The **aerosol optical depth**, **(AOD)** is a useful quantity to aggregate the radiative effects of different aerosol species into one quantity.
AOD describes the vertically integrated amount of solar radiation that is extinguished due to absorption and scattering by aerosol particles.
The degree of extinction of radiation travelling a distance $\dd{s}$ through the atmosphere depends on the amount of matter (i.e., gas molecules, aerosol particles, and cloud hydrometeors (otherwise known as rain and snow)) in the light path, $s$, and the wavelength $\lambda$.
Beer's law quantifies the change in radiation intensity at a certain wavelength due to extinction $\dd{I_\lambda}$, as follows:

```{math}
:label: beer_law
\dv{I_\lambda}{s} = - k_{\lambda, \mathrm{ext}} I_\lambda
```

Where $I_\lambda$ is the wavelength-dependent intensity of radiation (in $\mathrm{W \ m^{-2}}$) and $k_{\lambda, \mathrm{ext}} = k_{\lambda, \mathrm{abs}} + k_{\lambda, \mathrm{scat}}$ denotes the wavelength-dependent extinction coefficient (in $\mathrm{m^{-1}}$), which is the sum of the absorption and scattering coefficients.
For cloud-free conditions and neglecting the extinction by gases, the wavelength-dependent extinction coefficient can be obtained by integrating over the extinction efficiency times the distribution of the cross-sectional area of the aerosol population, which is $r^2 n_N(r)$ where $n_N(r)$ is the aerosol number size distribution:

```{math}
:label: extinction_int
k_{\lambda, \mathrm{ext}} = \int_0^\infty \pi r^2 n_N(r) Q_{\lambda, \mathrm{ext}}(r) \dd{r}
```

where $Q_{\lambda, \mathrm{ext}}$ is the wavelength-dependent extinction efficiency for particles with radii between $r$ and $r + \dd{r}$.

We can simplify Equation {eq}`beer_law` further by considering monochromatic light only, thus removing the dependence on $\lambda$.
After integrating, we obtain net extinction (due to the presence of aerosol particles) of a light beam travelling downwards in the vertical from TOA to a height $z$, where the light path, $s$, has been replaced with altitude, $z$, because we are working in the vertical, as follows:

```{math}
\frac{I(z)}{I_0} = \exp(- \int_z^{\mathrm{TOA}} k_\mathrm{ext} \dd{z}) = e^{-\tau}
```

where $I_0$ is the incident radiation (at TOA), and is $\tau$ is the AOD (due to the presence of aerosol particles only).